This symposium has helped us
to appreciate even more
Jehovah’s love
for families.
And we appreciate this gift,
the Bible,
which serves
as a blueprint for families
to have a loving,
warm, safe environment.
You young ones
play a vital role
in contributing
to the joy in your family life.
Your mother and your father
love you very much,
and they want to have a close,
personal, loving relationship with you.
And it’s
their heartfelt desire
that you have a close,
personal, loving relationship
with your heavenly Father, Jehovah.
They want you
to be happy now
and for the rest of your life
—everlasting life.
In the previous talk,
we understood how Jehovah wants
parents to train
their children.
But with what purpose?
Notice what Proverbs 22:6
gives as instructions
for parents.
There in verse 6, it reads:
“Train a boy
[or the footnote says, “child; youth”]
“in the way he should go;
even when he grows old
he will not depart from it.”
So, what is Jehovah
asking of your parents?
To train you
—to train you in such a way
that you will always serve
Jehovah from your youth
all the way
to your adulthood
and, really,
for the rest of your life.
So Jehovah doesn’t spell out
every single detail
for parents on how they should instruct
you and how they should train you.
That’s left up to them.
So they need to prayerfully think
about what would be best for your family
and for you
as a child personally.
This means that they
will make house rules.
Sometimes you’ll get chores,
maybe curfews.
You will get reminders,
correction, and discipline.
Why?
Because they love you
and because they’re doing their best
to listen and obey Jehovah,
and his instructions
are to train you
and discipline you so that you
can serve Jehovah forever.
It’s not an easy assignment.
They need all the help
that they can get from Jehovah
as well as from you,
especially when they make rules
that you may not like:
what you can and cannot wear,
what you can
and cannot listen to or watch,
or who you pick
as close friends.
These are decisions
that are left to your parents.
Now, will your parents always make
the perfect decision, the perfect rule?
No.
Breaking news:
It’s not news to you
that they will make mistakes.
They’re imperfect,
but they love you,
and they’re doing the best
they can to give you
the best training possible
so you can love Jehovah
and serve him forever.
We know that you
love and appreciate
all that your parents do for you,
but let’s be real.
Sometimes you don’t understand
the reason for the rule
or you simply don’t agree with it.
What do you do?
Well, you get frustrated.
But that’s OK.
We’ve been there.
We were your age
at one time,
and we completely understand
that it could be frustrating.
But we know
that this will pass
because you’ll understand
why they’re doing this.
It’s out of love.
So when you
don’t see eye to eye,
what are you supposed to do?
Well, sometimes you need
to change your view.
Much has to do with how
you view your parents.
How you view
your mother and your father
will affect how much
or how little
you respect them,
listen to them, and obey them.
And here’s a question
we’d like to pose to you children:
Do you sometimes
view your parents
as prison guards
or lifeguards?
Interesting question.
Prison guards are trained
to keep a close watch over prisoners
because they
don’t really trust them.
They keep them confined
with many restrictions.
They tell them what to do
and when to do it
—when to get up
and when to go to sleep,
what they will eat
and when they will eat,
what they will wear,
and all kinds of other rules.
They keep all these restrictions
because they don’t trust them.
Do you view your parents
as prison guards at times?
Well, you might,
especially if you want
more freedom
—more independence.
And if it seems like they
don’t really trust you
(they’re watching every single move
that you make),
you might feel confined
because of all the rules
and restrictions.
What about lifeguards?
Well, lifeguards also watch people;
they watch swimmers,
but for a very different reason.
They want
to keep them safe.
They want to make sure
that they do not swim into danger.
So from their lifeguard tower, they keep
a close watch over all the swimmers.
Sometimes they will use
their whistle to warn you of danger
—to keep away from riptides
or maybe sharks,
things that you’re not aware of.
Do you view
your parents as lifeguards?
We hope so
because they are.
It’s been said
that you could spend years
wishing your parents
would get off your back
only to realize
that they’re the only ones
who ever really had your back.
Yes, your parents,
like lifeguards,
are looking out
for your best interest.
They’ve always had your back,
and they always will.
They want to make sure that you will avoid
being drawn into the dangerous currents
in this wicked world
—dangers that you may not be aware of.
Do you want to be happier?
Do you want to have
more trust from your parents?
more freedom?
more independence?
If so, you might have to change
your view of your parents.
Don’t view them in a negative way
(like they’re prison guards),
but view them like lifeguards,
safeguarding your life.
Your parents
love you very much,
and their training
will pay off if you listen.
And that’s what Jehovah
is asking you to do.
While your parents
are training you,
you need to do your part
—and that is to listen.
And that’s what our scripture
at Proverbs chapter 23
has as an assignment for you.
That’s chapter 23
of Proverbs in verse 22.
And there, verse 22
says to you children:
“Listen to your father
who caused your birth,
“and do not despise
[or dislike]
your mother
just because she has grown old.”
So although it’s not easy at times,
what is Jehovah asking of you?
As your parents are training you,
please listen to them.
But what does it mean to listen?
Listening is more
than just hearing words.
It’s hearing
with a view to obeying.
Listening to your mother
and your father
means giving them
your full attention
—undivided attention.
It means turning off your music,
taking out your earbuds,
putting away your phone,
and avoiding rolling your eyes
when they’re speaking to you.
At times, you may get frustrated;
you may get upset.
That’s understandable.
We all do,
but how you control your emotions
will affect
the outcome in the future.
By listening
and obeying your parents,
you are building
a record of trust
that will help
you in the future
when you need to communicate with them,
maybe about rules.
Remember,
trust is something that you earn;
it’s not something that you demand
or that’s automatic.
What is the best way for you
to speak to your parents
about rules that you don’t understand
or maybe that you don’t agree with?
You need to communicate
—good, open communication.
Communication
doesn’t mean complaining,
shouting, whining,
maybe replying with sarcasm.
It means calmly telling
your parents how you feel.
Tell them what’s on your mind.
The following Bible verse
helps if we can apply it.
Proverbs 29:11 says:
“A stupid person
gives vent to all his feelings
“[It’s out of control—no control.],
but the wise one
calmly keeps them in check
[in control].”
That’s what we want
to try to follow.
A young woman named Devan tried to do this,
and this is what she advises.
She says,
“I found that when I stayed calm
“and presented
my thoughts clearly,
“I could count on
my parents to listen
“and either to reason
with me on their decision
or to come up
with another solution.”
Parents appreciate having
a real conversation with their children
rather than screaming matches
that end up with slamming doors.
Open communication
is what’s needed.
So you young ones,
what have we learned?
We have learned
how to view our parents correctly,
not as a prison guard,
but as a lifeguard
who really wants to save your life
—your everlasting life.
They have your back,
and they always will.
Listening and obeying strengthens
your relationship with your parents
as well as your heavenly Father, Jehovah.
It brings you joy
and brings joy to your parents.
And as you apply the training
that your parents are giving to you,
you will gain wisdom
that will help you now
to make wise decisions
so that you can have
the real life,
yes, everlasting life.
As you watch the concluding video
of this symposium,
please notice how these children
find joy in their parents.
Man, I’m so happy today because
that fire drill interrupted our math test.
But we have to do it tomorrow,
so I’m going to be
studying again all night.
Hey, Mom, Dad!
I’ve got to shower before our study.
No discussion, no excuses.
Now!
OK.
Where did all of this come from?
We’re going to be here all night.
It did give us time to think.
They are such good examples.
Mom never stops working.
And our home
is always, always beautiful.
They give us so much of their time
and themselves.
It’s a bit cheesy sometimes,
but overall, they’re pretty great.
That night, they didn’t lecture us.
They just reminded us of one thing.
And it was pretty deep.
When we dedicate our lives to Jehovah,
our lives include everything
—our time, our resources, our home,
our kitchen.
Yes, our kitchen.
And how we care for those things,
it reflects on him
and on us as your parents.
That kind of sank in.
I knew I could do better.
No, Mom.
We got this.
Um.
We got this?
Oh, yeah.
We got this.
Did you notice how the daughters
showed respect for their parents?
They did this by listening
and obeying their instructions.
What was the key?
It’s how they viewed
their parents.
They reflected
on their parents’ fine example
in the ministry and at home,
where they would take the time
and have the patience to help them,
to listen to them.
And they saw the joy
on their mother’s face
as she kept the home
clean and tidy.
What a good example!
They listened
to their parents’ advice,
and then they
made personal application.
They learned
that showing respect in the family
meant helping out with chores,
even when it meant
doing the dishes.
This made their parents happy
and the daughters happy as well.
In this symposium, we considered
how husbands and wives,
mothers and fathers,
and children can all add
and contribute to the success
of the joy within the family.
They do this
by working together in unity,
focusing on the positive things
in others
and having respect
for one another.
Yes, each in the family,
if they apply Bible principles
—use Jehovah’s blueprint—
they know that they can have
a successful and happy family.
And most of all,
we can make Jehovah happy
—give him honor
as the Designer,
the Architect,
and the Creator of all families.